ScrapeConfig CRD: Proposal For Extending The CRD Surface (#6634)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202405-scrapeconfig-graduation.md

> # Extending The Surface of The ScrapeConfig CRD

Reviewer: should we rather advertise as "Graduate ScrapeConfig CRD to beta"?

Author: I agree, that seems more fitting.

* Owners:
  * [mviswanathsai](https://github.com/mviswanathsai)
* Related Tickets:
  * n/a
* Other docs:
  * [ScrapeConfig Design Proposal](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/proposals/202212-scrape-config.md)

## Why

> The goal of this proposal is to bring the ScrapeConfig CRD in the Prometheus Operator to a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus scrape_config. By enhancing the SD support, aligning the CRD fields, and standardizing configurations, we aim to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution. This will improve usability, cover more use cases, and prepare for a smooth transition to a beta version of the ScrapeConfig CRD.

Reviewer: General remark: let's avoid the SD acronym and spell it out.

## Non-Goals

- Implementing all 28 SD configurations immediately.
- Introducing major breaking changes without a clear migration path.

## How

### Enhancing SD Support

In order to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution, enhancing the SD support in the Prometheus Operator is crucial. This will address current limitations and better serve diverse user needs. The following steps outline our approach to achieving this goal:

#### Additional SD Configurations

Expanding our SD support is a key aspect of this proposal. By adding more SD configurations, we increase the flexibility and utility of the CRD for various user scenarios. Specifically, we will:

1. **Add New SD Configurations** (Including and not limited to):
   - **`dockerswarm_sd_config`**: Docker Swarm is a popular container orchestration tool. Supporting Docker Swarm SD will cater to users leveraging Docker Swarm for their deployments.
   - **`puppetdb_sd_config`**: PuppetDB is a storage service that keeps data generated by Puppet. Integrating PuppetDB SD will be beneficial for users who utilize Puppet for configuration management.

>    - **`lightsail_sd_config`**: Amazon Lightsail is a simplified cloud platform. Including Lightsail SD will assist users who prefer Lightsail for its ease of use and cost-effectiveness.

Reviewer: Can you list the service discoveries which will *not* be supported yet?

It has been noted that it might not be necessary to cover all of the Service discoveries since some of them are very niche and rarely used. But it would not hurt to cover all of them eventually.
Newer SDs can be added as part of feature requests, which we hope to prompt users to do if the SD they use is not yet supported.

#### Filling Gaps in The CRD

Ensuring that the ScrapeConfig CRD accurately reflects Prometheus's `scrape_config` is essential for maintaining consistency and completeness. This involves including all relevant fields and ensuring they are correctly implemented. Our approach includes:

> 1. **Include Missing Fields**:

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
##### Include Missing Fields
```

     - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we are introducing an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
     - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
   - Include missing fields such as:
     - `scrape_classic_histograms`
     - `follow_redirects`
     - `enable_http`
     - `oauth2`
     - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
     - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

2. **Review and Standardize**:
   - **Comprehensive Review**: We will conduct a thorough review of all existing SD configurations to ensure they meet the required standards. This includes verifying the presence of all necessary fields and checking for consistency in naming conventions.
   - **Standardization**: By standardizing naming conventions and field presence across both existing and new SD configurations, we ensure that the ScrapeConfig CRD is intuitive and easy to use for developers and users alike.

>    - **Documentation and Examples**: We will update all related documentation and provide clear examples to reflect these changes. This will aid users in understanding and utilizing the enhanced SD configurations effectively.

Reviewer 2: Nice to know that. Let me know for documentation enhancement. It would also help me to keep adding missing features in the documentation asap.

Reviewer 3: For documentation I have some examples in https://github.com/slashpai/prometheus-operator-examples/tree/main/scrape_config which can be used

Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the SDs), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

### Graduation Strategy

To ensure a smooth transition to a beta version of the ScrapeConfig CRD, we will follow a structured graduation strategy. This strategy includes evaluating the current state, implementing necessary changes, and planning the transition in a way that minimizes disruption for users. The key steps are:

1. **Evaluation**:
   - Conduct a thorough evaluation of existing SDs, fields, and naming conventions to identify any gaps or inconsistencies.
   - Add missing fields and extend SD support based on the evaluation results.

2. **Transition Plan**:

>    We had a bunch of options to chose from, but I believe moving to an intermediate, `v1alpha2` version before moving to beta is more manageable and reduces potential complexity.

Reviewer 2: This is a great idea. I don't know much about webhooks but maybe having a separate version would help in ease the process.

### Testing and Verification

To maintain high standards of quality and reliability, we will:

- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Develop unit tests for all new and existing SD configurations to ensure their functionality and correctness.
- **Explore End-to-End Testing**: Investigate the use of [testcontainers](https://golang.testcontainers.org/) to set up comprehensive end-to-end testing environments. This will help verify the validity and robustness of our SD configurations in real-world scenarios.

### Miscellaneous Enhancements

1. **Consolidation of Monitor Resources**:
   - Explore the possibility of consolidating Monitor resources into ScrapeConfig instances, using feature gates to manage the transition. This approach aims to create a single source of truth for configuration generation, simplifying management and improving consistency. This is a change which affects a huge part of the user base, a separate design proposal and more time to investigate options would be required. It is not a primary focus for now, but something which we aim to get to once the main objectives of this proposal seem close.

2. **Quality-of-Life Features**:

>    - Introduce additional features that enhance usability, such as frequently used relabeling configurations and metadata attachment options for Kubernetes SD using `attachMetadata` field (like in Pod and Service Monitors). These enhancements will make it easier for users to configure and manage their monitoring setups. Though not necessary, it can be useful.

Reviewer: Hmm we already support attachMetadata in the Kube SD ScrapeConfig? Having said, I'll add an explicit work item to check that ScrapeConfig supports all Kube SD options because it's our first-class citizen SD.

- Introducing major breaking changes without a clear migration path.

## How

### Enhancing Service Discovery Support

In order to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution, enhancing the Service Discovery support in the Prometheus Operator is crucial. This will address current limitations and better serve diverse user needs. The following steps outline our approach to achieving this goal:

#### Additional Service Discovery Configurations

Expanding our Service Discovery support is a key aspect of this proposal. By adding more Service Discovery configurations, we increase the flexibility and utility of the CRD for various user scenarios. Specifically, we will:

1. **Add New Service Discovery Configurations** (Including and not limited to):
   - **`dockerswarm_sd_config`**: Docker Swarm is a popular container orchestration tool. Supporting Docker Swarm Service Discovery will cater to users leveraging Docker Swarm for their deployments.
   - **`puppetdb_sd_config`**: PuppetDB is a storage service that keeps data generated by Puppet. Integrating PuppetDB Service Discovery will be beneficial for users who utilize Puppet for configuration management.

>    - **`lightsail_sd_config`**: Amazon Lightsail is a simplified cloud platform. Including Lightsail Service Discovery will assist users who prefer Lightsail for its ease of use and cost-effectiveness.

Author: Not really, we came up with the 3 SDs from discussions and they are mainly just SDs we have seen people use.

  - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we are introducing an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
  - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
- Include missing fields such as:
  - `scrape_classic_histograms`
  - `follow_redirects`
  - `enable_http`
  - `oauth2`
  - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
  - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

##### Review and Standardize
- **Comprehensive Review**: We will conduct a thorough review of all existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure they meet the required standards. This includes verifying the presence of all necessary fields and checking for consistency in naming conventions.
- **Standardization**: By standardizing naming conventions and field presence across both existing and new Service Discovery configurations, we ensure that the ScrapeConfig CRD is intuitive and easy to use for developers and users alike.

> - **Documentation and Examples**: We will update all related documentation and provide clear examples to reflect these changes. This will aid users in understanding and utilizing the enhanced Service Discovery configurations effectively.

Reviewer 2: I will discuss with @mviswanathsai

Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoverys), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

### Graduation Strategy

To ensure a smooth transition to a beta version of the ScrapeConfig CRD, we will follow a structured graduation strategy. This strategy includes evaluating the current state, implementing necessary changes, and planning the transition in a way that minimizes disruption for users. The key steps are:

1. **Evaluation**:
   - Conduct a thorough evaluation of existing Service Discoverys, fields, and naming conventions to identify any gaps or inconsistencies.
   - Add missing fields and extend Service Discovery support based on the evaluation results.

2. **Transition Plan**:
   We had a bunch of options to chose from, but I believe moving to an intermediate, `v1alpha2` version before moving to beta is more manageable and reduces potential complexity.

>    We have reason to believe introducing a conversion webhook might slow down the graduation process than aid it, also hearing about complexities with Alertmanager which is still stored in its alpha variant in the etcd.

Author: I agree, after a discussion with @simonpasquier, we have aligned that a conversion webhook could still prove to be a big burden (TB to Alertmanager) and that many users might not be using it as yet (need to validate this claim with the helm charts.) But the general idea we have come to is that we do not want to support the migration from alpha1 to beta1. And it might even be of value for us to introduce breaking changes (if any) in alpha1 itself and just copy it over to beta1.

   Also, rather than simply not supporting the conversion, promising a `v1alpha2` version which is identical to the `v1beta1` versions seems more user friendly.

>    As of now, I do not personally see any breaking changes that might need to be introduced to the API. Yet, I still believe that we could benefit from having an intermediate `v1alpha2`, to be sure of the API before meddling with the beta transition.

Author: Indeed, the benefit I tried to get across was that we have some liberty with alpha2 more than we do with beta1. But I agree that it might pay to just move to beta1.

   The plan is as follows:

>    - **Move to `v1alpha2`**: Introducing an intermediate `v1alpha2` version allows us to refine the API while keeping the stakes low. This step provides flexibility to make necessary adjustments without promising stability to users.

Reviewer 4: As mentioned in [K8s API versioning docs, a beta API doesn't require stability as well](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning:~:text=The%20software%20is%20not%20recommended%20for%20production%20uses.%20Subsequent%20releases%20may%20introduce%20incompatible%20changes.%20Use%20of%20beta%20API%20versions%20is%20required%20to%20transition%20to%20subsequent%20beta%20or%20stable%20API%20versions%20once%20the%20beta%20API%20version%20is%20deprecated%20and%20no%20longer%20served.)

>    - **Graduate to `v1beta1`**: Once we are confident in the stability and completeness of the API, we will transition to `v1beta1`. This final step ensures that we offer a stable and robust API to users, ready for production use.

Reviewer 4: > Once we are confident in the stability and completeness of the API, we will transition to `v1beta1`

This sounds a bit subjective, different readers might interpret `stability and completeness` differently. Could you clarify what **_you_** think of `stability and completeness` mean? Is it about adding e2e tests with testcontainers? Is it about implementing X amount of SDs? If yes, how many SDs is considered "enough completeness"?

Author: I agree, the text is pretty vague. Let me it clearer and get back.

>    - **Documentation and Migration**: Provide clear and comprehensive documentation to guide users through the transition. This includes detailing any manual steps required and ensuring users understand the changes and how to adapt to them.

Author: Documentation explaining our stance on the migration. For example, right now I am of the opinion that migration needs to be handled by the user and no automation in the form of conversion webhook will be implemented. I will make it clearer.

This graduation strategy ensures a balanced approach, allowing us to refine the API while preparing for a more stable and well-supported beta release.

### Testing and Verification

To maintain high standards of quality and reliability, we will:

- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Develop unit tests for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure their functionality and correctness.
- **Explore End-to-End Testing**: Investigate the use of [testcontainers](https://golang.testcontainers.org/) to set up comprehensive end-to-end testing environments. This will help verify the validity and robustness of our Service Discovery configurations in real-world scenarios.

### Miscellaneous Enhancements

1. **Consolidation of Monitor Resources**:

>    - Explore the possibility of consolidating Monitor resources into ScrapeConfig instances, using feature gates to manage the transition. This approach aims to create a single source of truth for configuration generation, simplifying management and improving consistency. This is a change which affects a huge part of the user base, a separate design proposal and more time to investigate options would be required. It is not a primary focus for now, but something which we aim to get to once the main objectives of this proposal seem close.

Reviewer 4: Perfect!  Is this part of `v1alpha2`? `v1beta1`? `v1`?

## Goals

- Enhance the Service Discovery support by adding more Service Discovery configurations.
- Ensure all fields in Prometheus `scrape_config` are represented in the ScrapeConfig CRD.
- Maintain naming conventions and field consistency across existing and new Service Discoveries.
- Identify inconsistencies in validations.
- Pave the way for graduating the ScrapeConfig CRD to Beta.

## Audience

- Prometheus Operator maintainers and contributors.
- Users and developers relying on the Prometheus Operator for monitoring configurations.
- Stakeholders interested in the evolution and improvement of the Prometheus Operator.

## Non-Goals

- Implementing all 28 Service Discovery configurations immediately.
- To plan out a detailed graduation strategy.

## How

### Enhancing Service Discovery Support

In order to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution, enhancing the
Service Discovery support in the Prometheus Operator is crucial. This will address current
limitations and better serve diverse user needs. The following steps outline our approach to achieving this goal:

> #### Additional Service Discovery Configurations

Reviewer: Can you start by listing all Prometheus SDs and group them into 2 sub-categories (supported/not supported by ScrapeConfig)?

Reviewer: I would still like to see high-level guidelines about how much effort we intend to put into supporting each SD.

Reviewer: After discussing offline, the 1st group would be:
* Kubernetes
* File SD
* Static config
* DNS SD
* HTTP SD

And the "2nd group" would be any provider that offers the ability to deploy Kubernetes clusters so you can run the Prometheus operator and monitor virtual infrastructure from the provider.

we shall add the following 3 Service discoveries, the choice for which is not necessarily backed up by any usage data.

- **`dockerswarm_sd_config`**: Docker Swarm is a popular container orchestration tool. Supporting Docker Swarm Service Discovery will cater to users leveraging Docker Swarm for their deployments.
- **`puppetdb_sd_config`**: PuppetDB is a storage service that keeps data generated by Puppet. Integrating PuppetDB Service Discovery will be beneficial for users who utilize Puppet for configuration management.
- **`lightsail_sd_config`**: Amazon Lightsail is a simplified cloud platform. Including Lightsail Service Discovery will assist users who prefer Lightsail for its ease of use and cost-effectiveness.

The following is a list of Service Discoveries we will not be supporting yet:
*Note: this list is subject to change and the Service Discoveries can be added on respective feature requests. Users
are encouraged to file a feature request if they see a service discovery they use in the list.*

- **`ovhcloud_sd_config`**
- **`ionos_sd_config`**
- **`marathon_sd_config`**
- **`nerve_sd_config`**
- **`serverset_sd_config`**

> - **`triton_sd_config`**

Reviewer: I'd move Marathon, Nerve, ServerSet and Triton at the bottom of the list and highlight that these environments are either deprecated, inactive or not widespread enough that we need to care about them.

- **`scaleway_sd_config`**
- **`uyuni_sd_config`**
- **`vultr_sd_config`**

> #### Filling Gaps in The CRD

Reviewer: (nit) I'd rather have the following structure

```
#### Expose missing fields

#### Improve API consistency
````

  - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we are introducing an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
  - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
- Include missing fields such as:
  - `scrape_classic_histograms`
  - `follow_redirects`
  - `enable_http`
  - `oauth2`
  - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
  - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

##### Handle inconsistencies:

The idea is to make the API as restrictive as possible against the user making wrong/redundant manifests. To that extent, the CRD contains a number
of inconsistencies, both in naming conventions and in field validations that need to be rectified. Some of the noted inconsistencies are:
- Missing validations on `URL`, `Host` fields.
- Missing validations on maximum and minimum int value acceptable for `Port` field.
- Missing Prometheus version check for various Service Discoveries.

> - Missing `MinLenght` validation on multiple string fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Missing `MinLength` validation on multiple string fields.
```

- Multiple `Filter` fields present with identical code.

I propose that once the above 3 Service discoveries (and any more, from feature requests) are implemented, we will start restructuring the ScrapeConfig API
one Service discovery at a time to achieve a tightly knit API surface. To that extent, the general rule of thumb will be: "Make the API as strict
as possible." This allows us to lower the level of restrictions in the future if need be, whereas the converse might not always be feasible.

> Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoverys), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.
```

worry about conversion webhooks and the user does not need to perform any delibrate migration from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`. Further, currently the CRD is in alpha stage
and I believe that it if fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it, than to introduce more complexity
into the code base.
As of now, I do not personally see any breaking changes that might need to be introduced to the API. However, if it is inevitable that there
are changes after the `v1beta1` graduation of the ScrapeConfig, we might want to introduce a conversion webhook,
but that is a conversation for another time.

This graduation strategy ensures a balanced approach, allowing us to refine the API while preparing for a more stable and well-supported beta release.

### Testing and Verification

To maintain high standards of quality and reliability, we will:

- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Develop unit tests for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure that the expected configuration is generated and validations are in place.

> - **Explore End-to-End Testing**: Investigate the use of [testcontainers](https://golang.testcontainers.org/) to set up comprehensive end-to-end testing environments. This will help verify the validity and robustness of our Service Discovery configurations in real-world scenarios. However, this is not a priority.

Reviewer 3: add issue link here? https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6452

# Graduate ScrapeConfig CRD To Beta

* Owners:
  * [mviswanathsai](https://github.com/mviswanathsai)
* Related Tickets:

>   * n/a

Reviewer 3: We should probably log github issue for this and link it here

* Other docs:
  * [ScrapeConfig Design Proposal](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/proposals/202212-scrape-config.md)

## Why

The goal of this proposal is to pave the way to graduate the ScrapeConfig CRD in the Prometheus Operator to beta. We aim to do this by building
a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config`. By enhancing the Service Discovery support, aligning the CRD fields, and standardizing
configurations, we aim to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution and pave the way for a smooth transition to a beta
version of the ScrapeConfig CRD.

## Pitfalls of the Current Solution

> - The CRD is currently in Alpha, this hinders its adoption among users of Prometheus-Operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The CRD is currently in v1alpha1 version, this hinders its adoption among the users of Prometheus-Operator.
```

## Goals

> - Pave the way for graduating the ScrapeConfig CRD to Beta by aligning on the graduation criteria.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Pave the way for graduating the ScrapeConfig CRD to v1beta1 by aligning on the graduation criteria.
```

- Enhance the Service Discovery support by adding more Service Discovery configurations.

> - Ensure all fields in Prometheus `scrape_config` are represented in the ScrapeConfig CRD.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Ensure all fields in Prometheus `scrape_config` are supported in the ScrapeConfig CRD.
```

- Maintain naming conventions and field consistency across existing and new Service Discoveries.
- Identify inconsistencies in validations.

## Audience

- Prometheus Operator maintainers and contributors.

> - Users and developers relying on the Prometheus Operator for monitoring configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Users and developers relying on the Prometheus Operator for creating monitoring configurations.
```

- Stakeholders interested in the evolution and improvement of the Prometheus Operator.

## Non-Goals

> - Implementing all 28 Service Discovery configurations immediately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Implementing all 28 Service Discovery configurations in Prometheus immediately.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementing the 28 Service Discovery configurations currently supported by Prometheus.
```

We believe that most of the user's needs can be solved with the Kubernetes service discovery and the other existing service discoveries that we offer
and so implementing all the Service discoveries is not a priority. However, this does not imply service discovery support is halted at this number.
It would be a better use of time to add the service discoveries that the users need as we get feature requests for them. As a starting point,
we shall add the following 3 Service discoveries, the choice for which is not necessarily backed up by any usage data.

The following is the list of Service Discoveries which we want to support before graduation:

- *`azure_sd_config`*
- *`consul_sd_config`*
- *`digitalocean_sd_config`*
- *`docker_sd_config`*
- *`dockerswarm_sd_config`*
- *`dns_sd_config`*
- *`ec2_sd_config`*
- *`openstack_sd_config`*
- *`puppetdb_sd_config`*
- *`file_sd_config`*
- *`gce_sd_config`*
- *`hetzner_sd_config`*
- *`http_sd_config`*
- *`kubernetes_sd_config`*
- *`kuma_sd_config`*
- *`lightsail_sd_config`*
- *`linode_sd_config`*
- *`nomad_sd_config`*
- *`eureka_sd_config`*

The following is a list of Service Discoveries we will not be supporting yet:

> *Note: this list is tentative in the sense that Service Discoveries in this list might be added based on feature requests but we do no yet

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Note: This is tentative list in the sense that Service Discoveries in this list might be added based on feature requests.
```

Reviewer 3: Above comment still valid

> readily plan to add them.*

Reviewer 3: nit: may be this line not needed?

- **`ovhcloud_sd_config`**
- **`ionos_sd_config`**
- **`scaleway_sd_config`**
- **`uyuni_sd_config`**
- **`vultr_sd_config`**

The following Service Discoveries most likely will not be supported due to them being deprecated or inactive:

- **`marathon_sd_config`**
- **`nerve_sd_config`**
- **`serverset_sd_config`**
- **`triton_sd_config`**

#### Expose Missing Fields

> - We will incorporate all fields present in Prometheus `scrape_config` into the ScrapeConfig CRD. However, there are specific exceptions:

Reviewer 5: Add unified definition top-level configuration.
ref: https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6486

Author: I understand the issue you have referenced. But could you elaborate a bit on what you are implying? just to be clear we are on the same page.

  - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we are introducing an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
  - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
- Include missing fields such as:
  - `scrape_classic_histograms`
  - `follow_redirects`
  - `enable_http`
  - `oauth2`
  - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
  - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

#### Improve API Consistency

> The idea is to make the API as restrictive as possible against the user making wrong/redundant manifests. To that extent, the CRD contains a number

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The idea is to make the API as restrictive as possible against the user making wrong/redundant configurations. To that extent, the CRD contains a number
```

> of inconsistencies, both in naming conventions and in field validations that need to be rectified. Some of the noted inconsistencies are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of inconsistencies both in naming conventions and field validations that need to be rectified. Some of the noted inconsistencies are:
```

> - Missing validations on `URL`, `Host` fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Missing validations on `URL` and `Host` fields.
```

> - Missing validations on maximum and minimum int value acceptable for `Port` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Missing validations on maximum and minimum value acceptable for `Port` field.
```

- Missing Prometheus version check for various Service Discoveries.
- Missing `MinLength` validation on multiple string fields.
- Multiple `Filter` fields present with identical code.

> I propose that once the above 3 Service discoveries (and any more, from feature requests) are implemented, we will start restructuring the ScrapeConfig API

Reviewer 3: I think we need to connect what those 3 SDs you meant here

Reviewer 3: This is still valid, can we mention which 3 SD's you meant here?

one Service discovery at a time to achieve a tightly knit API surface. To that extent, the general rule of thumb will be: "Make the API as strict
as possible." This allows us to lower the level of restrictions in the future if need be, whereas the converse might not always be feasible.

> Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability beyond Kubernetes.
```

Reviewer 3: still valid :)

### Graduation Strategy

#### Requirements for Graduation

> I feel that we can graduate the CRD to beta when the following milestones are all achieved:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I feel that we can graduate the CRD to `v1beta1` when the following milestones are achieved:
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to graduate the CRD to beta when the following milestones are all achieved:
```

1. The Service Discoveries which we have listed are all supported.
2. There is consensus among the maintainers about the API consistency.

> 3. We are confident about the completeness of the test cases coverage for the API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. We are confident about the completeness of the test coverage for the API.
```

#### Path for Graduation

*Note that this is not meant to be a definitive, complete path for graduation. Rather, it can be viewed at as a discussion of the possible strategies.*

From past experience with the Alertmanager CRD, I am of the impression that we might want to avoid the implementation of a conversion webhook

> if we can. To that extent, I feel that the option 1, which suggests that we move from `v1alpha1` -> `v1beta1` without a conversion webhook might

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if posisble. To that extent, I feel that the option 1 which suggests that we move from `v1alpha1` -> `v1beta1` without a conversion webhook might
```

> be a good fit. Once we are confident in the API has all the missing fields mentioned above and any Service discoveries requested by users,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be a good fit. Once we are confident that API has all the missing fields and Service Discoveries mentioned above,
```

Reviewer 3: still valid

with necessary validations in place and void of any apparent inconsistencies, we will transition to `v1beta1`.

We can go a step further and introduce breaking changes (if any) in v1alpha1 and then just copy it over to v1beta1. This way, we do not have to

> worry about conversion webhooks and the user does not need to perform any delibrate migration from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`. Further, currently the CRD is in alpha stage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
worry about conversion webhooks and the user does not need to perform any deliberate migration from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`. Further, currently the CRD is in alpha stage
```

> and I believe that it if fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it, than to introduce more complexity

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and I believe that its fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it than to introduce more complexity
```

into the code base.
As of now, I do not personally see any breaking changes that might need to be introduced to the API. However, if it is inevitable that there
are changes after the `v1beta1` graduation of the ScrapeConfig, we might want to introduce a conversion webhook,
but that is a conversation for another time.

> This graduation strategy ensures a balanced approach, allowing us to refine the API while preparing for a more stable and well-supported beta release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This graduation strategy ensures a balanced approach, allowing us to refine the API while preparing for a more stable and well-supported v1beta1 release.
```

### Testing and Verification

> - **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Develop unit tests for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure that the expected configuration is generated and validations are in place.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**:  Ensure unit tests are added for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure that the expected configuration is generated and validations are in place.
```

- **Explore End-to-End Testing**: Investigate the use of [testcontainers](https://golang.testcontainers.org/) to set up comprehensive end-to-end testing environments ([#6452](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6452)). This will help verify the validity and robustness of our Service Discovery configurations in real-world scenarios. However, this is not a priority.

> 

Reviewer 3: we should probably add covering all testcases for KubernetesSD as that SD is our main and e2e test can be added without depending on other tools

is not a priority. However, this does not imply service discovery support is limited to what exists today.
It would be a better use of time to add the service discoveries that the users need as we get feature requests for them.

The following is the list of Service Discoveries which we want to support before graduation:

- *`azure_sd_config`*
- *`consul_sd_config`*
- *`digitalocean_sd_config`*
- *`docker_sd_config`*
- *`dockerswarm_sd_config`*
- *`dns_sd_config`*
- *`ec2_sd_config`*
- *`openstack_sd_config`*
- *`puppetdb_sd_config`*
- *`file_sd_config`*
- *`gce_sd_config`*
- *`hetzner_sd_config`*
- *`http_sd_config`*
- *`kubernetes_sd_config`*
- *`kuma_sd_config`*
- *`lightsail_sd_config`*
- *`linode_sd_config`*
- *`nomad_sd_config`*
- *`eureka_sd_config`*
- *`ovhcloud_sd_config`*

The following is a list of Service Discoveries we will not be supporting yet:
*Note: this list is tentative in the sense that Service Discoveries in this list might be added based on feature requests but we do no yet
readily plan to add them.*

- **`ionos_sd_config`**
- **`scaleway_sd_config`**
- **`uyuni_sd_config`**

> - **`vultr_sd_config`**

Reviewer: I suspect that the list isn't up-to-date anymore.

2. There is consensus among the maintainers about the API consistency.
3. We are confident about the completeness of the test cases coverage for the API.

#### Path for Graduation

*Note that this is not meant to be a definitive, complete path for graduation. Rather, it can be viewed at as a discussion of the possible strategies.*

From past experience with the Alertmanager CRD, we suggest to avoid the implementation of a conversion webhook
if we can. To that extent, I feel that the option 1, which suggests that we move from `v1alpha1` -> `v1beta1` without a conversion webhook might
be a good fit. Once we are confident in the API has all the missing fields mentioned above and any Service discoveries requested by users,
with necessary validations in place and void of any apparent inconsistencies, we will transition to `v1beta1`.

We can go a step further and introduce breaking changes (if any) in v1alpha1 and then just copy it over to v1beta1. This way, we do not have to
worry about conversion webhooks and the user does not need to perform any deliberate migration from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`. Further, currently the CRD is in alpha stage

> and I believe that it is fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it than to introduce more complexity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and we believe that it is fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it than to introduce more complexity
```

into the code base.

> As of now, I do not personally see any breaking changes that might need to be introduced to the API. However, if it is inevitable that there
> are changes after the `v1beta1` graduation of the ScrapeConfig, we might want to introduce a conversion webhook,
> but that is a conversation for another time.

Reviewer: I'd remove this section since it's not being discussed in this proposal after all.
```suggestion
```

# Graduate ScrapeConfig CRD To Beta

* Owners:
  * [mviswanathsai](https://github.com/mviswanathsai)
* Related Tickets:

>   * [Add A Design Proposal for Extending The ScrapeConfig API surface](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6697)

Author: My bad :)

- Enhance the Service Discovery support by adding more Service Discovery configurations.
- Ensure all fields in Prometheus `scrape_config` are supported in the ScrapeConfig CRD.
- Maintain naming conventions and field consistency across existing and new Service Discoveries.
- Identify inconsistencies in validations.

## Audience

- Prometheus Operator maintainers and contributors.
- Users and developers relying on the Prometheus Operator for creating monitoring configurations.
- Stakeholders interested in the evolution and improvement of the Prometheus Operator.

## Non-Goals

- Implementing all 28 Service Discovery configurations immediately.
- To plan out a detailed graduation strategy.

## How

In order to provide a more comprehensive and versatile monitoring solution, enhancing the
Service Discovery support in the Prometheus Operator is crucial. This will address current
limitations and better serve diverse user needs. The following steps outline our approach to achieving this goal:

#### Additional Service Discovery Configurations

By adding more Service Discovery configurations, we increase the flexibility and utility of the CRD for various user scenarios.

> We believe that most of the user's needs can be solved with the Kubernetes service discovery and the other existing service discoveries that we offer

Reviewer: I would stress that the sole target for the prometheus operator is Kubernetes, hence it makes sense to have full support for the Kubernetes SD.

It would be a better use of time to add the service discoveries that the users need as we get feature requests for them. As a starting point,
we shall add the following 3 Service discoveries, the choice for which is not necessarily backed up by any usage data.

The following is the list of Service Discoveries which we want to support before graduation:

- *`azure_sd_config`*
- *`consul_sd_config`*
- *`digitalocean_sd_config`*
- *`docker_sd_config`*
- *`dockerswarm_sd_config`*
- *`dns_sd_config`*
- *`ec2_sd_config`*
- *`openstack_sd_config`*
- *`puppetdb_sd_config`*
- *`file_sd_config`*
- *`gce_sd_config`*
- *`hetzner_sd_config`*
- *`http_sd_config`*
- *`kubernetes_sd_config`*
- *`kuma_sd_config`*
- *`lightsail_sd_config`*
- *`linode_sd_config`*
- *`nomad_sd_config`*
- *`eureka_sd_config`*

The following is a list of Service Discoveries we will not be supporting yet:
*Note: this list is tentative in the sense that Service Discoveries in this list might be added based on feature requests but we do no yet
readily plan to add them.*

- **`ovhcloud_sd_config`**
- **`ionos_sd_config`**
- **`scaleway_sd_config`**
- **`uyuni_sd_config`**
- **`vultr_sd_config`**

> The following Service Discoveries most likely will not be supported due to them being deprecated or inactive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't plan to support the following Service Discoveries, due to them being deprecated or inactive:
```

  - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we are introducing an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
  - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
- Include missing fields such as:
  - `scrape_classic_histograms`
  - `follow_redirects`
  - `enable_http`
  - `oauth2`
  - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
  - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

#### Improve API Consistency

The idea is to make the API as restrictive as possible against the user making wrong/redundant manifests. To that extent, the CRD contains a number
of inconsistencies, both in naming conventions and in field validations that need to be rectified. Some of the noted inconsistencies are:
- Missing validations on `URL`, `Host` fields.
- Missing validations on maximum and minimum int value acceptable for `Port` field.
- Missing Prometheus version check for various Service Discoveries.

> - Missing `MinLength` validation on multiple string fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Missing length validation on multiple string fields.
```

as possible." This allows us to lower the level of restrictions in the future if need be, whereas the converse might not always be feasible.

Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

### Graduation Strategy

#### Requirements for Graduation

I feel that we can graduate the CRD to beta when the following milestones are all achieved:
1. The Service Discoveries which we have listed are all supported.
2. There is consensus among the maintainers about the API consistency.
3. We are confident about the completeness of the test cases coverage for the API.

#### Path for Graduation

*Note that this is not meant to be a definitive, complete path for graduation. Rather, it can be viewed at as a discussion of the possible strategies.*

> From past experience with the Alertmanager CRD, I am of the impression that we might want to avoid the implementation of a conversion webhook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From past experience with the Alertmanager CRD, we suggest to avoid the implementation of a conversion webhook
```

We can go a step further and introduce breaking changes (if any) in v1alpha1 and then just copy it over to v1beta1. This way, we do not have to
worry about conversion webhooks and the user does not need to perform any deliberate migration from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`. Further, currently the CRD is in alpha stage
and I believe that it is fine for us to introduce breaking changes in this stage and trust the user handle it than to introduce more complexity
into the code base.
As of now, I do not personally see any breaking changes that might need to be introduced to the API. However, if it is inevitable that there
are changes after the `v1beta1` graduation of the ScrapeConfig, we might want to introduce a conversion webhook,
but that is a conversation for another time.

This graduation strategy ensures a balanced approach, allowing us to refine the API while preparing for a more stable and well-supported v1beta1 release.

### Testing and Verification

- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Ensure that unit tests are added for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure that the expected configuration is generated and validations are in place.

> - **Explore End-to-End Testing**: Investigate the use of [testcontainers](https://golang.testcontainers.org/) to set up comprehensive end-to-end testing environments ([#6452](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/6452)). This will help verify the validity and robustness of our Service Discovery configurations in real-world scenarios. However, this is not a priority.

Reviewer: I'm not sure that Prometheus operator is the right place where it should happen: unit tests with golden files should be enough to validate each SD.
End-to-end tests should cover Kubernetes though because 1) we have the testing environment and 2) Prometheus upstream doesn't do much here.

Reviewer 4: That said, the state of SD in Prometheus is constantly being discussed within our team. If anyone is interested in contributing end-to-end tests, with testcontainers or something else, to the Prometheus repository, I'm pretty sure the team will be happy to receive such contributions :)

restructur the ScrapeConfig API one Service discovery at a time to achieve a tightly knit API surface. To that extent, the general rule
of thumb will be: "Make the API as strict as possible." This allows us to lower the level of restrictions in the future if need be, whereas
the converse might not always be feasible.

Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability beyond Kubernetes.

### Graduation Strategy

#### Requirements for Graduation

We propose to graduate the CRD to beta when the following milestones are all achieved:
1. The Service Discoveries which we have listed are all supported.
2. There is consensus among the maintainers about the API consistency.
3. We are confident about the completeness of the test cases coverage for the API.

#### Path for Graduation

> From past experience with the graduation of the Alertmanager CRD, we believe that the cost of implementing and maintaining a conversion webhook is too much to bear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From past experience with the graduation of the `AlertmanagerConfig` CRD, we believe that the cost of implementing and maintaining a conversion webhook is too much to bear
```

and we would like to avoid it when possible.
Keeping this in mind, we recommend that we make all the breaking changes in `v1alpha` and
once there is a consensus in the community about the "readiness"/"completeness" of the`v1alpha1`, we graduate the ScrapeConfig CRD to `v1beta1`.
Note: In this strategy, both the `v1alpha1` and `v1beta1` APIs are expected to be identical to eachother, thus barring the need for a conversion webhook.

From the [Kuberenetes CRD docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/#specify-multiple-versions),
the `CustomResourceDefinition` would contain the following lines:

```
  conversion:
    # None conversion assumes the same schema for all versions and only sets the apiVersion
    # field of custom resources to the proper value
    strategy: None
```

> Another idea we could think of was to move to an intermediate `v1alpha2` version before graduation to `v1beta1`, but we don't see any benefit from this strategy.
> 

Reviewer: IIUC it's covered in the alternatives.
```suggestion
```

### Testing and Verification

- **Covering All Test Cases For Kubernetes Service Discovery**: Since Kubernetes is our main player, make sure all testcases for unit tests and e2e tests have been covered for the Kubernetes Service Discovery.

- **Implement Comprehensive Unit Tests**: Ensure that unit tests are added for all new and existing Service Discovery configurations to ensure that the expected configuration is generated and validations are in place.

> ### Miscellaneous Enhancements
> 
> 1. **Consolidation of Monitor Resources**:
>    - Once we have the `v1beta1` API version for the ScrapeConfig, we can start thinking about consolidating the monitor resources into a low-level ScrapeConfig object.
>      For the timebeing however, this is a non-goal.

Reviewer: I would remove since it's already mentioned in the non-goals.
```suggestion
```

## Alternatives

- **Introduce v1alpha2 Before Beta**
  - Strategy: Create a `v1alpha2` version incorporating all necessary breaking changes and refinements. Transition from `v1alpha2` to `v1beta1` when ready.
  - Con: additional complexity for users without real benefit.

- **Implement v1alpha1 to v1beta1 Conversion Webhook**
  - Strategy: Graduate to `v1beta1` from `v1alpha1` with all the necessary changes/improvements and handle any breaking changes in the API between the two versions
    with a conversion webhook. This ensures that users can automatically transition their configurations without manual intervention.
  - Con: Greatly increases complexity for the maintainers as well as the users.

> 
> - **Avoid v1alpha1 to v1beta1 Conversion Webhook**
>   - Strategy: Graduate to `v1beta1` from `v1alpha1` with all the necessary changes/improvements and require users to manually handle any breaking changes
>     or conversion tasks. Provide detailed documentation and support to guide users through the transition process.
>   - Con: Additional complexity for existing users of the API.

Reviewer: IIUC it's the selected approach so not really an alternative.
```suggestion
```

along with the other existing service discoveries that we offer should be sufficient for most user's needs and so implementing all the Service discoveries
is not a priority. However, this does not imply service discovery support is limited to what exists today.
It would be a better use of time to add the service discoveries that the users need as we get feature requests for them.

The following is the list of Service Discoveries which we want to support before graduation:

- *`azure_sd_config`*
- *`consul_sd_config`*
- *`digitalocean_sd_config`*
- *`docker_sd_config`*
- *`dockerswarm_sd_config`*
- *`dns_sd_config`*
- *`ec2_sd_config`*
- *`openstack_sd_config`*
- *`puppetdb_sd_config`*
- *`file_sd_config`*
- *`gce_sd_config`*
- *`hetzner_sd_config`*
- *`http_sd_config`*
- *`kubernetes_sd_config`*
- *`kuma_sd_config`*
- *`lightsail_sd_config`*
- *`linode_sd_config`*
- *`nomad_sd_config`*
- *`eureka_sd_config`*
- *`ovhcloud_sd_config`*
- *`scaleway_sd_config`*
- *`ionos_sd_config`*

If we were to categorize the Service Discoveries based on the amount of effort we are willing to put in maintaining them:

**Tier-1:**

> Deploying the Operator to Kubernetes is our sole use case. So it is logical that we want to provide maximum support to any service discovery that fundamentally fits into the a Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: (suggestion) we could define more precisely what we mean by "tier A" and add some justifications to the list. 
```suggestion
Project maintainers fully support the service discovery in this group. It includes the Kubernetes SD since the Operator requires a Kubernetes control plane to run. It also includes core service discoveries based on well-established protocols.
```

- Kubernetes Service Discovery
- File Service Discovery
- Static config
- DNS Service Discovery
- HTTP Service Discovery

**Tier-2:**

> Deploying the Operator to Kubernetes is our sole use case, so it is logical to extend support for cloud providers who provide a managed Kubernetes service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This group includes service discoveries which are related to Kubernetes and cloud-native environments. The project maintainers don't actively support them but they are happy to review issues and pull requests.
```

- Azure Service Discovery
- EC2 Service Discovery
- Lightsail Service Discovery
- DigitalOcean Service Discovery
- Kuma Service Discovery
- OVHCloud Service Discovery
- Scaleway Service Discovery
- Ionos Service Discovery
- OpenStack Service Discovery
Though it doesn't fit with the description given above, Consul is a widely used solution. For this reason, it makes sense to include Consul Service Discovery in this list.
- Consul Service Discovery

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we should say here that the project maintainers don't commit on anything for the other service discoveries not listed above?

Author: Agreed.

   - Explore the possibility of consolidating Monitor resources into ScrapeConfig instances, using feature gates to
     manage the transition. This approach aims to create a single source of truth for configuration generation, simplifying
     management and improving consistency. This is a change which affects a huge part of the user base, a separate design proposal
     and more time to investigate options would be required. It is not a primary focus for now, but something which we aim to get
     to once the main objectives of this proposal seem close.
     The work on this can be started either in `v1alpha1` or `v1beta1` stages with the following morale:
     1. In `v1beta1`, the API is expected to be fairly complete with all the features and fixes mentioned above. At this stage, it might
        be a good idea to play with the consolidation logic behind a feature gate.
     2. In `v1alpha1`, the API is still nascent as a result we have more freedom in introducing breaking changes to the API, if need be, for the
        consolidation logic (which we believe would need a design proposal of its own). Whereas, after graduation, we might have to introduce a conversion webhook

>         for the same, but it is just speculation and we believe it is too early to judge this now.

Reviewer: It's probably enough to outline in the non-goals that it's not in the scope of this proposal and it will have to wait for v1beta1.

2. **Quality-of-Life Features**:
   - Introduce additional features that enhance usability, such as frequently used relabeling configurations like metadata attachment
     for Kubernetes Service Discovery using the `attachMetadata` field. These enhancements are not necessary but aim to make it easier
     for users to configure and manage their monitoring setups.

## Alternatives

- **Direct Graduation to Beta**
  - Strategy: Move directly from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1` without any intermediate steps.

- **No API Changes in Beta**
  - Strategy: Ensure no API changes from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`, avoiding the need for a conversion webhook.

- **Introduce v1alpha2 Before Beta**
  - Strategy: Create a `v1alpha2` version incorporating all necessary breaking changes and refinements. Transition from `v1alpha2` to `v1beta1` when ready.

- **Implement v1alpha1 to v1beta1 Conversion Webhook**
  - Strategy: Graduate directly to `v1beta1` from `v1alpha1` and handle any breaking changes through a conversion webhook. This ensures that users can automatically transition their configurations without manual intervention.

- **Manual Conversion by Users**

>   - Strategy: Graduate directly to `v1beta1` and require users to manually handle any breaking changes or conversion tasks. Provide detailed documentation and support to guide users through the transition process.

Author: I have reworded it, let me know if its clear now.

* Other docs:
  * [ScrapeConfig Design Proposal](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/proposals/202212-scrape-config.md)
  * [Kubernetes API versioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning)

## Why

The goal of this proposal is to pave the way to graduate the ScrapeConfig CRD in the Prometheus Operator to beta. We aim to do this by building
a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config`. By enhancing the Service Discovery support, aligning the CRD fields, and standardizing
configurations.

## Pitfalls of the Current Solution

- The CRD is currently in v1alpha1 version, this hinders its adoption among the users of Prometheus-Operator.

## Goals

- Pave the way for graduating the ScrapeConfig CRD to v1beta1 by aligning on the graduation criteria.
- Enhance the Service Discovery support by adding more Service Discovery configurations.
- Ensure all fields in Prometheus `scrape_config` are supported in the ScrapeConfig CRD.
- Maintain naming conventions and field consistency across existing and new Service Discoveries.

> - Identify inconsistencies in validations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Identify inconsistencies in validations.
- Outline the migration strategy from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1`.
```

## Audience

- Prometheus Operator maintainers and contributors.
- Users and developers relying on the Prometheus Operator for creating monitoring configurations.
- Stakeholders interested in the evolution and improvement of the Prometheus Operator.

## Non-Goals

- Implementing the 28 Service Discovery configurations currently supported by Prometheus.

> - To plan out a detailed graduation strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Convert existing monitor objects to low-level ScrapeConfig objects.
```

It would be a better use of time to add the service discoveries that the users need as we get feature requests for them.

The following is the list of Service Discoveries which we want to support before graduation:

- *`azure_sd_config`*
- *`consul_sd_config`*
- *`digitalocean_sd_config`*
- *`docker_sd_config`*
- *`dockerswarm_sd_config`*
- *`dns_sd_config`*
- *`ec2_sd_config`*
- *`openstack_sd_config`*
- *`puppetdb_sd_config`*
- *`file_sd_config`*
- *`gce_sd_config`*
- *`hetzner_sd_config`*
- *`http_sd_config`*
- *`kubernetes_sd_config`*
- *`kuma_sd_config`*
- *`lightsail_sd_config`*
- *`linode_sd_config`*
- *`nomad_sd_config`*
- *`eureka_sd_config`*
- *`ovhcloud_sd_config`*
- *`scaleway_sd_config`*
- *`ionos_sd_config`*

If we were to categorize the Service Discoveries based on the amount of effort we are willing to put in maintaining them:

**Tier-1:**
Project maintainers fully support the service discovery in this group. It includes the Kubernetes SD since the Operator requires a Kubernetes control plane to run. It also includes core service discoveries based on well-established protocols.
- Kubernetes Service Discovery
- File Service Discovery

> - Static config

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Static Config
```

- DNS Service Discovery
- HTTP Service Discovery

**Tier-2:**
This group includes service discoveries which are related to Kubernetes and cloud-native environments. The project maintainers don't actively support them but they are happy to review issues and pull requests.
- Azure Service Discovery
- EC2 Service Discovery
- Lightsail Service Discovery
- DigitalOcean Service Discovery
- Kuma Service Discovery
- OVHCloud Service Discovery
- Scaleway Service Discovery
- Ionos Service Discovery
- OpenStack Service Discovery

> Though it doesn't fit with the description given above, Consul is a widely used solution. For this reason, it makes sense to include Consul Service Discovery in this list.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to have this line here? Instead update description above and say 
```
This group includes service discoveries which are related to Kubernetes, cloud-native environments and widely adopted solutions. The project maintainers don't actively support them but they are happy to review issues and pull requests.
```

Reviewer 3: nit: Move Consul and OpenStack to top after DigitalOcean as they are more used solutions

as possible." This allows us to lower the level of restrictions in the future if need be, whereas the converse might not always be feasible.

Through these efforts, we aim to achieve a 1:1 relationship with the Prometheus `scrape_config` (minus the Service Discoveries), enhancing the usability and completeness of the ScrapeConfig CRD. This alignment ensures that users have access to the full range of configurations offered by Prometheus, making the Prometheus Operator a more powerful and flexible tool for monitoring and observability.

### Graduation Strategy

#### Requirements for Graduation

We propose to graduate the CRD to beta when the following milestones are all achieved:
1. The Service Discoveries which we have listed are all supported.
2. There is consensus among the maintainers about the API consistency.
3. We are confident about the completeness of the test cases coverage for the API.

#### Path for Graduation

*Note that this is not meant to be a definitive, complete path for graduation. Rather, it can be viewed at as a discussion of the possible strategies.*

From past experience with the Alertmanager CRD, we suggest to avoid the implementation of a conversion webhook

> if we can. To that extent, I feel that the option 1, which suggests that we move from `v1alpha1` -> `v1beta1` without a conversion webhook might

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if possible. To that extent, I feel that the option 1 which suggests that we move from `v1alpha1` -> `v1beta1` without a conversion webhook might
```

> be a good fit. Once we are confident in the API has all the missing fields mentioned above and any Service discoveries requested by users,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be a good fit. Once we are confident that API has all the missing fields and Service Discoveries mentioned above,
```

At the time of writing this document, the following Service Discoveries are not supported but may be added in the future on user requests and contributions:

- **`uyuni_sd_config`**
- **`vultr_sd_config`**

We don't plan to support the following Service Discoveries, due to them being deprecated or inactive:

- **`marathon_sd_config`**
- **`nerve_sd_config`**
- **`serverset_sd_config`**
- **`triton_sd_config`**

#### Expose Missing Fields

- We will incorporate all fields present in Prometheus `scrape_config` into the ScrapeConfig CRD. However, there are specific exceptions:
  - **`job_name`**: To prevent issues related to non-unique job names, we have introduced an equivalent `JobName` field, which ensures safer and more predictable configurations.
  - **`body_size_limit`**: This field is managed globally through `CommonPrometheusFields`. Additionally, users can set `body_size_limit` at the ScrapeConfig CRD level for specific scrape jobs, providing flexibility without redundancy.
- Include missing fields such as:
  - `scrape_classic_histograms`
  - `follow_redirects`
  - `enable_http`
  - `oauth2`
  - `native_histogram_bucket_limit`
  - `native_histogram_min_bucket_factor`

> #### Improve API Consistency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Improve API Consistency
```

- *`scaleway_sd_config`*
- *`ionos_sd_config`*

If we were to categorize the Service Discoveries based on the amount of effort we are willing to put in maintaining them:

**Tier-1:**
Deploying the Operator to Kubernetes is our sole use case. So it is logical that we want to provide maximum support to any service discovery that fundamentally fits into the a Kubernetes cluster.
- Kubernetes Service Discovery
- File Service Discovery
- Static config
- DNS Service Discovery
- HTTP Service Discovery

**Tier-2:**
Deploying the Operator to Kubernetes is our sole use case, so it is logical to extend support for cloud providers who provide a managed Kubernetes service.
- Azure Service Discovery
- EC2 Service Discovery
- Consul Service Discovery
- Lightsail Service Discovery
- DigitalOcean Service Discovery
- Kuma Service Discovery
- OVHCloud Service Discovery
- Scaleway Service Discovery

> - Ionos Service Discovery

Reviewer: I would add OpenStack to the list since there are some integration points with Kubernetes. Also Consul isn't directly tied to Kubernetes but it's a widely used solution so it makes sense to include it in the list.
